---
title: "The immensurable housing dilemma that is Stockholm"
date: "2018-03-27"
coverImage: "GLOMO_house-dilemma-in-stockholm.jpg"
---

Finding good accomodation in any big city is known to be a huge obstacle for a happy and balanced life and nowhere is this more true than Stockholm. Known for its high class establishments and fashion, Stockholm is also known for its cut throat and ruthless housing market. It is a place where people are sometimes forced to move multiple times per year and renting a 25 square meter flat in the city center can go for as high as 20.000 crowns (1.969 euros) per month. The rental market in Stockholm is divided into three categories: First hand rentals, second hand rentals and sublets.

First hand rentals are when you rent your apartment directly from a real estate company (Fastighetsbolag). This kind of accommodation is essentially a permanent rental but to get one contract you need to join a line (and pay a small yearly fee). The problem is that the line can take several years (5 years are common, more than 10 are not unheard of). Therefore, while maybe a good long term option, it is not a feasible short term option for someone who has just moved to the city.

Second hand rentals and sublets mean you rent your apartment in a non-permanent basis, either from someone who owns the apartment or from someone who is renting it from a real estate company. In this kind of situation the "landlord" (he/she doesn't really own the apartment) needs to state a reason why he is renting it out (for example he is moving out of the country for a few months) and there is usually a time limit for how long he can do it. This is the only real option for people who just moved into the city and it means you will probably be paying a higher monthly cost since these people rent it for profit and you will also have to move around a lot because of the limited duration they are allowed to be rented out. Subletting is sometimes done in an illegal manner and in those cases there is little protection to the renter, people often get evicted from their sublets without proper notice. Both usually require an upfront deposit, beware that scams are common for this type of accomodation, never pay a deposit fee without seeing the apartment first.

Of course there is also the extreme option: Buying. The buying process in Sweden works in an auction-based way, people place bids and whoever has the highest bid gets the right to buy the apartment. The whole process takes about a week, first there are public showings on sundays or mondays followed by the bidding process during the week and finally signing the contracts on friday. This all means that apartment prices in high valued locations can go exorbitantly high, even for Swedish standards. On the other hand mortgages are surprisingly easy to secure if you have a permanent job and the interest rates are small with only 15% down payment required. Houses for sale are easy to find online through www.hemnet.se. Keep in mind that bids in apartments are non-binding, meaning you can bid into two apartments at the same time and even if you win both you can let one of them go without repercussions, although that is frowned upon.

Another thing to take in consideration when buying is that when you buy an apartment in Stockholm you are not buying the apartment itself, but rather a share in the building association (Bostadsrättsförening or BRF) and the right to live in an apartment. The building association owns all the apartments in the building (and some cover more than one building) and essentially work as a company, meaning when you buy an apartment you essentially become a partner to the building association. The associations usually have some amount of debt which can increase the monthly payments you have to pay to the association (these monthly payments also usually include water, heating and general upkeep for the building). You can check the state of a building association and its debt levels in www.allabrf.se. Third and most importantly is that there are two types of building associations, genuine (äkta) and non-genuine (oäkta). Non-genuine differs from genuine associations in that a significant portion of their income comes from commercial activity (like a store or restaurant in the ground floor), these types of association might be harder to secure a mortgage for because if the business running in the association close down it might mean greatly increased monthly payments to the association. However the presence of business in the association also means far lower monthly payments because the business subsidize part of the apartments monthly payments. Non-genuine associations also have very different tax rules, in simple terms the part of your monthly payment that is subsidized by the business gets taxed by the tax agency (Skatteverket) so you have to take that into account when calculating your monthly payments. Note that genuine associations can have business as well, the difference is the amount of the percentage of the total income of the association that comes from businesses.

Another approach is to just not live in Stockholm, there are plenty of neighboring cities that provide great access to Stockholm city center through high speed trains, these include Södertalje and Eskilstuna among others. Your commute time will be longer but your rent will be dramatically cheaper, enough to offset the train fare costs. Buying in a neighboring city is also a good option, especially for families as you will be able to afford bigger homes.

Whatever approach you take, do your research. Everyone wants to live in the city center, but few can afford it. In Stockholm you can have good price, location or size, but you can only pick two.
